you probably know David Byrne as a lead
singer and songwriter of Talking Heads
the hugely influential post-punk Rock
Band of the late 1970s and 80s they
broke up more than 30 years ago but
Byrne has been on his own eclectic
Journey ever since his artistic
Innovations have blurred the boundaries
of Music Theater and art he's won an
Oscar a Grammy and a Tony toured with
salsa singers collaborated with
neuroscientists made movies and this
summer his musical about the former
first lady of the Philippines Imelda
Marcos opens on Broadway
David Byrne is 71 and as we first told
you earlier this year he is as creative
energetic and unusual as he was when he
was 23 an art school dropout just
starting to perform on stage with his
friends as Talking Heads
the story will continue in a moment
the name of this band is Talking Heads
and the name of this song is psycho
killer
so I wanted to be very matter of fact
it's not like are we having fun tonight
yeah there's no there's none of that how
you do all doing how are you all doing
New York
something about
sometimes
this is one of David Byrne's first
performances it was 1975 at cbgb's a
legendary music Club where the Ramones
Patty Smith and Blondie were also just
getting started
Psycho Killer was only the second song
David Byrne had ever ridden and it was
Talking Heads first head
when you hear it now what do you think
I'm I'm glad I did it but I'm also glad
that I didn't stick with that as by oh
like oh this is working let's do more
like this I'm glad that I decided no now
you have to do things that are a little
more original musically
[Music]
exactly what he did along with Tina
Weymouth Chris Franz and Jerry Harrison
Talking Heads put out eight albums over
the next 13 years
they were edgy groundbreaking critically
acclaimed and a commercial hit
melting rock with funk disco afrobeat
and the avant-garde
[Music]
art in college and it showed in their
music videos which were in heavy
rotation on MTV
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
Bruce quirky movements and manner got
most of the attention famous
it was not always easy for the
introverted singer Dick Clark tried to
ask him about it on American Bandstand
in 1979. are you a shy person
I'd say so
it seems contradictory to a lot of
people the introvert who winds up on the
stage in front of thousands of people
performing and reaching Great Heights it
does seem contradictory but in
retrospect it makes perfect sense your
way of announcing Your Existence and
communicating your thoughts to people is
through performance and then I could
Retreat into my shell after that but I
had made myself known to these people
and what I was thinking what I was
feeling so when that's your only option
it's a lifesaver
David Byrne's shyness goes way back he
was born in Scotland but his family
moved to Baltimore when he was eight his
accent was so thick classmates could
barely understand him he was an outsider
happier making music at home in his
basement with a reel-to-reel tape
recorder than hanging out with other
kids my discomfort with kind of social
situations meant
as often happens I would focus intently
on my drawings or learning to place
other people's songs or things like that
and that continued for ages and you'd
kind of ultra focused so that becomes a
well kind of superpower
[Music]
Ultra Focus may be a superpower but it
caused problems between burn and the
band that flared up on tour in 1983. you
may ask yourself
[Music]
kind of obsessive about getting that
show up and running
I might not have been the most pleasant
person to deal with at that point
demanding yes yes
[Music]
Fern commanded Center Stage famously
wearing this outrageously oversized suit
[Music]
the show was made into a film by
director Jonathan Demi called stop
making sense it's considered one of the
greatest concert movies ever
[Music]
Talking Heads made three more albums but
burn was increasingly branching out on
his own as I became more relaxed as a
person started writing different kinds
of songs
songs that maybe weren't quite as angst
written and peculiar some fans were
probably disappointed you know we liked
the the really quirky guy or we liked
the guy who was kind of really
struggling with himself and really
having a hard time and I thought why
would you wish that on me
for your own Amusement right
[Music]
in 1988 he founded a world music label
[Music]
then released an album of Latin songs
and wrote music for films dance
companies and experimental theater I
genuinely started having other kind of
musical interests you'd start to
collaborate with a lot of artists from
different genres yes and I thought I
want to do more of that and by then it
was
pretty much over
there was never an official announcement
but eventually Byrne made an offhand
comment to a reporter that Talking Heads
had broken up he neglected it seems to
tell the band members of the band said
that you never actually talked to them
and said that the ban was over that they
read about it in her newspaper I don't
know if that's the case but well it
might be I think it is very possible
that I did not handle it as best as I
could
[Music]
burn never looked back and he's followed
his own beat ever since no matter how
offbeat it may be
ten years ago burn staged a pop Opera in
collaboration with Fat Boy Slim called
here lies love it's about of all people
Imelda Marcos the wife of the former
dictator of the Philippines it's now
scheduled to open on Broadway this
summer
very cool
when he became fascinated with high
school color guard teams in 2015 he
wound up staging Arena shows combining
the team's flag spinning weapon tossing
and dance to the pop music of Nelly
Furtado and Saint Vincent I thought oh
this is just going to be highlighting
their talent and putting people together
who would never normally be together and
it wasn't until I saw the show and I
realized this is not about this at all
what it's really delivering is this
message about inclusion that's what this
is about they kind of revealed it but
isn't that extraordinary that you can
start doing something with one thing in
mind and yet it it has a life of its own
I trust
what I do and what other people do that
way that it's going to deliver what it
wants to say but someone else looking at
it could go what are you talking about
you don't know what you're doing you
don't know why you're doing it you don't
know where it's going to end up well I
just kind of trust it yeah
he is a small studio in his New York
City Apartment where he Tinkers with
lyrics and new ideas much like he did
all those years ago in his parents
basement first stands it sounds like it
might be promising do you stop and kind
of ruminate on things and come back to
it and yeah I might see if I get her
like a chorus or something I might try
like a chorus
stood by me when darkness fell my
apartment is my friends
that's the key line so that's got to be
pretty good
burn is the quintessential New Yorker
he's lived in the city for five decades
and it's not uncommon to see him
pedaling around on his bicycle he is it
seems always on the Move always
exploring oh yeah his downtown office is
lined with books records and odd
mementos he's picked up here and there
this wonderful wine for Turkmenistan
hidden amid the Clutter there's a Grammy
and his 1988 Oscar for composing the
soundtrack for the film The Last Emperor
it's not on the lowest shelf I mean
David really does the academy know about
this you know when you go into
somebody's office and they have all
their Awards yes it's a whole framed all
around them or magazine covers you don't
have an ego wall oh yeah his office is
where he runs reasons to be cheerful oh
that could be nice online magazine
highlighting Creative Solutions to
complex problems from Reinventing food
banks in Chicago to Turning French
parking lots into solar Farms so are
there reasons to be cheerful oh yeah
yeah yeah if you get up in the morning
and start Doom scrolling through your
phone or your tablet or laptop or
whatever you're going to think no no no
no no world's going to hell on a hand
basket but uh there are people and
places organizations doing things that
are really making a difference finding
solutions to things
who am I
what do I want
how do I work this that optimism infused
a hit Broadway showburn created and
starred in called American Utopia
[Music]
it's actually like the performance
branch of reasons to be cheerful this is
really about Hope and possibility and
what
how we can work together as people
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
we mixed his old songs with new ones
Fern wanted the musicians to be
completely untethered
[Music]
be around the stage it was less a
Broadway musical more a raucous Revival
[Music]
[Applause]
when music like that is all around you
when there's a whole group of people who
are making the music
it's not just like one soloist or
something like that it's this Collective
thing that gives it this extra energy
[Applause]
Burns latest theatrical experience may
be his most unusual yet
it's an interactive journey into his
past called theater of the Mind produced
in collaboration with the Denver Center
for Performing Arts
audience members get random name tags
and are LED on a semi-autobiographical
tour of burns memories like this outer
proportioned kitchen makes anyone in it
feel like a child do this with me hold
your hand in front of your face the show
is full of surprises the audience takes
part in some of them based on
Neuroscience experiments we agreed not
to give them away but they make you
question your own perception and perhaps
your memories it is dark in here you
know theater of the Mind ends in a
replica of his parents attic like Burn's
life the show tells a story about how
over time our identities are malleable
and how we all have the capacity to
change we're never stuck
you can change the story anytime
isn't that nice I like that idea that
you can change your story you can change
the narrative it would be a horrible
world if people never changed for their
entire life or they were
they're an angry person or an upset
person or depressed person and it's like
that's your fate but that's not true do
you think you've changed that much I
feel like yeah I'm a very different
person than I was when I was young were
you conscious of of those changes
sometimes my friends would say
you're really different than what you
used to be when I first met you
you're a really different person now by
the way were they saying that in a nice
way or was that being yelled out of the
top of their lungs it was a nice way it
was like wow you've really changed
the stories behind hit songs from
Talking Heads it was inspired by Alice
Cooper and Randy Newman at 60 minutes
overtime.com
Circle